Hello and welcome to the short stuff. I'm Josh. There's Chuck there's J.J. brand new guest producer. We've got this revolving door going on.

It's just like a beautiful. And this is short stuff. Yeah J.J. is.

He's a pro though. Like it's not like you can just show up here get a ticket like you're at the deli.

No no nothing like that. This isn't this isn't Katz's Deli Miller I'd be pretty happy for. Nor is it Dr. Katz's therapy office anytime in here of Dr. Katz I think of. I think it was Dom Herrera.

He used to be a regular on that and he used to go like Dr. Katz cha cha cha cha and it's always it's been in my head since late 1993. Oh man. Dr. Katz was great. I guess it really was. Let's go watch some after this. OK. All right. But let's talk about cord of Roy first. Sure. Sure. That's fine. We can talk about that because you see him wearing it in honor today.

I know you're wearing some rust colored corduroy pants that I would say are maybe a probably about a twelve 10 to 12.

Well yeah cause maybe eight.

They're pretty standard Levi's cords whatever that whale is. And if you're wearing what we're talking about we'll tell you here in a minute after we get to a little bit of the history here which is debatable. Apparently it is because it's either French in origin Korda do Roy the king's cord. Mm hmm. But my money is a little more toward what the Brooks Brothers say which is no mate. It was street streetwear in 18th century England.

I don't think the Brooks Brothers sound like that. No. What did they sound like.

I can just think of Albert Brooks in Super Dave Osborne as the Brooks Brothers. Oh this kid. Why Dave Osborne he's not a Brooks is he. They're brothers man. Believe it. No no no. It's that great. Oh wow man. Their parents must have been really cool. Probably so.

Okay. So either way what we're really talking about here is where the origin of the name for the fabric came from it looks Chuck like corduroy has its roots way further back than that that it comes from possibly improbably a type of fabric from dating back to about 200 C.E. back in ancient Egypt called fusty it's named after the city where they were made foo start which is I think fusty and is still actually a term for certain types of corduroy or certain types of fabric including corduroy that a real thick and squishy in.

And originally they were pretty coarse.

Yeah. But that Brooks Brothers story has a lot of credibility because the word chord referencing the the rose the ridges the chords which makes sense and Du Roy which is a wolf fabric right. That sounds like a pretty open and shut case to me now.

Yeah I'm good. I'm no I'm with you I'm going with the Brooks Brothers interpretation to it is really just the the the the impression you did that I had an issue. OK.

But the fabric itself do you think that is Egyptian or Middle Ages. And then later Egyptian you know so.

So it was Egyptian first but it was it wasn't corded there weren't whales on it it was just one thick piece of like velvet kind of right where you have a certain kind of fabric and then woven on top of that fabric is it the fabric that makes it kind of plushie or thicker sturdier and that is what quarter Oy is at its its base and then that's what they were making for many many centuries and then finally at some point during the Middle Ages somebody said hey I've got a really good idea about this let's turn this into corduroy by cutting rows into this stuff right.

What we do know in the United States is that it was first made in Worcester Mass and about 1780. And I do need to shout out quarter Roy the bear here because not only is it does it appear in this how stuff works. Short article on corduroy but I have a pretty great quarter Roy the bear history which was I love that book. Lot it is a kid. Sure did you.

I was aware of it but I think it was a little ahead of my time.

Okay. I think is ahead of my time too. I mean I think it predates me but I love the story and my mom made she got a teddy bear that looked kind of like quarter oy and made him know little quarter Roy overalls and shorts and what was missing a button. So that is so sweet. Yeah I had my very own that's kind of one of the great things about my mom is she could really so and so she could make me things when they did not exist on the toy market.

Oh I see. Or she could save some money and just make her own knockoffs.

Well we did that as well. Right. Right. I had more than one t shirt made for him like curtain fabric.

It's layers. My mom used to take my T-shirts and stuff them in tournament to pillows when I groom. Oh that's sweet. Yeah. Yeah it was pretty sweet I've no idea where they are anymore but yeah I had a few nice. I had one that said BMX Oh yeah yeah. They'd be pretty cool to have today. It really would.

So we mentioned the whales and I think we should get to that before we take our little break. The whales are those rigid little ridges WRAL. Yes. I'm so glad you spelled it. Yeah and it's the higher the whale count the smaller the the little ridge is. So if you have worn one of those really fine sort of like corduroy oxfords. Mm hmm. I'm not a huge fan of them. For myself I don't mind the way they look but I've never like them for me personally. But that's about a 16 whale.

What don't you like about them. It's just not my bag. I'm not big on collared shirts period. They ruffle my neck and my chin.

Yeah I but that particular one you just described about the sixteen well court I think is typically called pink cord. Yeah. You have some of those right. I do not but I have to say researching court Roy made me want to go buy some corduroy stuff. So I think it's in the offing.

Yeah. My problem with my cords is they really wear out the knees very fast. Yeah. And unlike the guy who spends a lot of time on his knees not scrubbing floors much anything so I don't know what the deal is.

Okay. Well that's a mystery I think we can go to commercial break on. We'll figure it out.

Well now road driving in your why learn a thing or two from Josh. Josh you should. Write.

Who is Mike Pence who is Nancy Pelosi. They're two of the most powerful people in government today. But how they get there. My name is Sean. And on who is the first podcast from now this. And I Heart Radio I'll tell you the stories of the most important politicians in America and beyond. Through interviews with the reporters and experts who know them best. There is no Illuminati There's no deep state but there are these people on who is a cover everything from Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell's answering machine to Senator Elizabeth Warren's favorite junk food to where Secretary of Education Betsy divorce and her husband went on their first date.

Want to know more. Tune in to who is on Tuesdays on the I Heart Radio app. Apple podcasts or wherever you get your.

Guests.

All right check her back in. Let's talk a little more about how is made right because this blew my mind when I finally saw some diagrams and I understood it. All right. Let's hear it. So with a typical fabric you take two different sets of yarns and you weave them together perpendicular to one another and you have fabric when you're making a fusty in like a Thicker fluffier fabric like say Terry cloth or velvet or corduroy. Terry cloth you it's very nice isn't it. Yeah. You use a third set of yarn.

And so what you have is that basic you know flat fabric and then woven into the top of that. Is that thicker pile of fabric called the worst right. Yes. OK. And so just leaving it like that you have something like velvet or again like Terry cloth which you love so much. But if you want to make corduroy you take that that fusty and fabric and then you take a very sharp set of scissors or something like that and you cut a line all the way along the length of the fabric.

And what you've just done is created a two wail bolt of corduroy but doesn't know what's going to wear that right.

Yeah. And two will bolt is a great band name by the way it is.

That's funny because I was just going to say the only person who where there is somebody like flea from the Red Hot Chili Peppers but he'll wear anything his pants as we've seen over the years. So you start making more cuts and more cuts and like you were saying depending on how supple or nice you want to make the fabric the more cut you're going to make. But however many cuts there are however many ridges there are per inch. That's the whale count and that's kind of describes how thick the ridges are.

But the point is is when you make that cut what you've done is cut that top layer of fabric the additional third set of yarn and you've cut it into two and you've exposed the other traditional to yarn set of fabric underneath. And that's what Corduroy is. It's a raised ridge that used to be all one complete set of yarn and then there's valleys that are the fabric below. Yeah. I've been practicing this for four days. That's good. And it still didn't go according to plan like I want to cut my thigh with the razor blade right now.

I'm so frustrated Chuck.

No I think that was perfect actually what you end up with and how they actually refer to it in the industry is a three dimensional fabric a three dimensional pile weave. And like you've mentioned velvet and Terry Cloth are also three dimensional fabrics. Mm hmm. And it's pretty great they say in here that you need to steam or fluff quarter. I don't think that's the case at least I've never done that.

No. Only a Brooks Brothers would do that.

But I do have a pretty rockin quota Roy coat from back in the day. I mean the thing is I probably had it for 20 years and I got it second hand and it is beautiful and it's got a really fat whale's on it. Mm hmm. And I don't pull it out much anymore. It used to be my new york coat but I've evolved a bit since then but I still have it and it's really a nice coat that is.

Yeah. I think I know the coat you're talking about. I mean they're confusing you or Joe McCormack has one that he likes to rock a lot.

It's probably Joe because I haven't worn mine in years.

Okay but you got your secondhand 20 something years ago. Yeah. So that would have coincided roughly with the last quarter Roy revival in the first one I remember was in the 90s. Do you remember that.

Yeah I mean they were big in the 50s certainly in the 60s and 70s and then in the 90s I think that's when I got this thing and I got to I got one shorter one that had a narrower whale right. And then this longer one that has the big fat whales and I think I still have both of them.

Is it like a trench coat a quarter or a trench coat.

Yeah it's like a long quarter coat with the big brown buttons and like a wool lapel.

Is it like a barn code or something. A What a barn coat. I'm not sure what it is.

It sounds like what you're describing. You don't have to wear this in some day I'll bring it in. All right. I'll just bring it in for show and tell. Sure. But yeah. So it was kind of big in the 50s really took off in the late 60s and then really huge in the 70s and then went nowhere until the 90s and then I guess this thing said in the 2010s it came back or the 2000s it came back in which I was not aware of that at all.

Well I've always rocked the cord pants but over the years it has ranged from like school uniform fabric to World War One low ranking soldiers were at work where if you worked in like a factory because the stuff is pretty warm right because it's thicker and it's durable too. Yeah very durable except in the knees. And and then it's you know sometimes it's also been looked at as something a little fancier.

Right. Which apparently originally was it was sportswear for the upper class and then somehow it just kind of fell out of favor and became associated with the working class and the lower classes. And then it just kind of stayed that way until like I think starting in the 20s for a little while there it was pretty common as upholstery for cars. You know that.

Yeah I have seen a car polo shirt in COBRA and it's pretty awesome.

I'll bet it's pretty awesome the only way that could be any better is if there were like patchwork corduroy.

Yeah. See now I know the jacket that you're talking about. That is Joe's for sure. Yes I think it even has elbow patches. Yeah. His is more like a blazer. Sure. Not a duster like yours. What else you got. I got nothing else man. I support quarter Roy like knowing a little bit more how it's made. Yeah. And I say wear it. It's never out of fashion.

Up with corduroy. Agreed.

If you want to know more about quarterly by the way check out headlines HDD e l s dot com they have something called quarter oi read between the lines of the wailed fabric by James Smith and it has a picture that will finally explain better than I possibly could how Corduroy is made. Very simply. OK we'll see you guys later. Because short stuff is out.

Stuff You Should Know is a production of hot radios how stuff works. For more podcasts My Heart Radio is. I hate radio app. Apple podcasts or wherever you listen to your favorite shows.

